---
layout: post
date: 2020-05-26
comments: true
title: Vectors
---
Vectors are generally introduced as something with both magnitude and direction. Then we learn how to add vectors, the law of parallelogram and out of nowhere we are introduced to scalar and vector product, with no explanation from where it came from. Why do we need two types of multiplication anyways? Randomly, textbooks include the projection of a vector and somehow sinθ and cosθ appear. Then you might forget about vectors till you reencounter them as divergence and curl or some other place.

That is unfair. Vectors are one of the most fundamental concepts in science, if not the most fundamental concept. You cannot have a movement without direction. If there is a direction, there has to be a vector somewhere. Most of the places where you don’t see a vector have a vector hidden from plain sight.

Anything without a direction is called a scalar. Anything you can measure with some kind of scale is a scalar. Do you want to measure sheep? There is a number scale for that. Want to measure distance? Use a metric scale. Weight? A weighing scale. Refractive Index? There is a scale of refractive indices. Toughness? Moh’s scale. The magnitude of an Earthquake? Richter’s scale. Work? Energy. All of them are scalars.
Now I challenge you to measure speed with a scale. Sure you can take a scale, measure the distance travelled, measure the time taken, divide and find out the speed. Well, it won’t work. You can say the speed is this much, but If I give you a car and speed is 50 km/hr, you will from where? Because 50km/hr up a hill is not the same as 50 km/hr down a hill. I dig a hole and drop a car from there, and the speed is still 50 km/hr—the where is really important.

Then why don’t we worry about the direction in real life? Because we artificially restrict the direction. The car goes along the road, and the road goes in one direction, so saying 50 km/hr is good enough as the direction is obviously the road. The vector is hidden away, treated like a scalar, but vector is still a vector. The distinction is important, so we call such one direction speeds as “velocity”.
You can go even further. You can fix the distance by making the car race around in a closed circular road. There is no need to mention the distance, so we measure race speed in time. Race records are in XYZ seconds for a particular distance in a particular direction, also called as a race track.
When we want to see how fast the car accelerates, have to mention the speed of the car, the distance and the direction. Nope. What is done is on a fixed race track, we count how fast car reaches 60 km/hr. Then we say, oh tesla reaches 0-60 in 2.3 seconds, that is crazy. Or you know how much time it takes to reach 60? 23 seconds! A bullock cart is faster than that! We are talking about acceleration here, i.e. metres travelled per second per second in terms of seconds!

But what is the direction? How do we define it? How do we decide something has direction, and something does not? 
Suppose you place a mango at a certain point on a table. You want to know where that mango is, you decide some point of a table and call it “origin”. Then you can say, it is x distance away from the origin and y distance away from the origin. You can even include the height of the table and call it z distance away. We call these 3 numbers “position” of the mango as these three numbers uniquely tell you where the mango is. No other numbers can give the same position. You do a bunch of stuff with the mango, throw it and calculate momentum, spin it and calculate inertia, whatnot.
Now a cat named mau comes and decides that she wants the origin at some other point. Cats are very finicky. The mango hasn’t moved at all, but the numbers have changed. Now you have to do a bunch of math stuff to recalculate everything. You can re-derive the formula. But does the momentum change with origin? No.

How about when mau changes the location of a mango? The origin is still the same but location has changed. Does the value of momentum change? Does physical law change because we have a new origin? Nope.

What about when mau rotates the mango? The mango is not the same as the original mango. But neither momentum or law changes. This irritates mau. She decides to rotate the origin itself. Everything has now rotated by an angle, say α. The x-axis is not x-axis anymore, the y-axis is not y-axis. Simple calculations now involve sin and cos, and everything is complicated. So you ask yourself. What if I decide to redefine my axis. The x-axis, y-axis and z-axis are rotated by angle α, but will the law of physics change? Will the value of momentum change just because we decided to redefine our axis? No.

But mau is a smart cat. Mau has an ace in a hole. She just waits. And does nothing. You are like, ha! Nothing happened! But. Your mathematics just turned ugly. Time is change, and no matter how you beat around it, you have to write derivates and partial derivatives and integrals. We all know how fun it is to solve integrals and differential equations. But. Will waiting a few seconds and throwing a mango have a different momentum than throwing a mango right now? (Assuming everything remains same) No.

Changing the origin does nothing. It doesn’t matter from where you start counting, nor does it matter where the mango is. It doesn’t matter which direction you choose as x-axis; every direction is the same. It doesn’t matter which second you choose to take the reading; every second is the same. (Unless you are in a field, like a changing magnetic field. Now the position time and angle will matter).

We asked what the direction is? And the answer we got instead is there no such thing as unique direction, origin or time. Pick one; they are all the same. That is what we are going to do. We are going to pick a random direction, origin and time. Direction cannot exist on its own. If a car is moving in a specific direction, it hs some mass. All the three numbers that come with an origin, (x,y,z coordinates), the direction and magnitude(mass), we are going to represent with a single character, i^. We call it a vector.

Why did we do that? No matter how we choose the axis or origin, the vector does not change. Or you can do the reverse. If you take a point on a graph and move it, it will mess the graph. You can move the vector wherever you want; the vector does not change. You can simply throw the origin and axes away, and still do the entire vector algebra. No problem.

We all know about the concepts of addition and multiplication. Take 5 metal balls in a jar, put 5 more in there, you get 10. First, take 5 and then add 5 more in the second step. These are two “consecutive” steps or one after another step. If the metal balls are magical and they multiply with a touch, each ball splits into 5 more balls at the same time. It is a “simultaneous” step.

Mau is playing with a metal ball. She pushes the ball in some direction. The ball weights 10 grams. We represent the direction by an arrow. She pushes a second ball in the same direction. The second ball crashes into the first one and transfers all of its energy into the first one. The second ball comes to a standstill while the first ball moves faster than before.

Let’s put this physical situation on paper. We take up a random origin and define the direction in which the ball moves as the x-axis. Now that we have the weight of the ball, coordinates of the ball as well as direction, we can define the vector x. Similarly, we have vector y for the second ball. Both are travelling in the same direction. When the second ball crashed into the first one, both vectors add together, and we get a new vector in the same direction. The magnitude (speed) of this new vector is the magnitude (speed) of vector x + magnitude (speed) of vector y.
Thus, we have added two vectors.

What about multiplication? Can we multiply two vectors? More importantly, what would multiplication of a vector mean physically?

Just like simple numbers, vectors are **added** when events occur in “*consecutive*” steps. One vector acts upon a second vector one after other. Vectors are **multiplied**, when events occur “*simultaneously*”. Both vectors should act upon each other at the same time.

Let’s say there is a small ball of 1 gram moving in x direction. If there are 10 such balls travelling in x direction it would be equivalent to 1 ball travelling in x direction. We will name the small ball as vector i. Thus we can start imagining our big ball of 10 grams as 10 small balls of 1 gram travelling together. Now we switch on our electromagnet. Each small ball of 1 gram is moving in the x direction as well as facing a pull in x direction at the same time. Let that pull in x direction be 2i’. Each ball which was moving with 1 m/s now moves with 2 m/s because of the magnet. The big ball which was moving at 10 m/s now moves at 20 m/s.

x = i1 + i2 + i3 + …. i10 = 10i

After magnet was switched on, both forces act at the same time, we have to multiply

x’ = (10i)(2i’) 
x’ = (i1 + i2 + i3 + …. i10)( 2i’)
x = 2i1 + 2i2 + 2i3 + …. 2i10
x = 20i

Because everything travels in the same direction, we can remove i, and the whole thing looks like this:

x = 10
x’ = (10)(2)
x’ = (1 + 1 + 1 + 1 + 1 + 1 + 1 + 1 + 1 + 1)2
x’ = (2 + 2 + 2 + 2 + 2 + 2 + 2 + 2 + 2 + 2)
x’ = 20
which is simple multiplication!

So we have managed to multiply things with a direction. Any vector can be divided into small vectors with magnitude 1, and same direction and then multiplied with a different vector in the same direction. This small vector is so special that we give a hat to wear for the tiny one and call it î (pronounced as I cap or I hat). 1 is a unit number, so î is a unit vector.

There is one thing that we took for granted here. When we were multiplying i1 with 2i’, the magnitude 1 x 2 = 2 multiplication was okay, but what about the multiplication of direction. What is the answer for (i) (i’)? If something moves in a direction, and you push it in the same direction, it continues moving in the same direction. Thus (i) (i’) = i. That is what I did under the covers.

You might complain that after reading over 2000 words, all we have accomplished is to make simple multiplication more complex. I have wasted time and effort that you have graciously gifted me. To take a leap, we need to take a step back. As I have often observed in science, things become complicated first before they start simplifying.

Not everything moves in a straight line. Mau ups her game, and now she is throwing the second metal ball in a different direction so that it collides with the first one at some point. The first one remains x made up of i^, second vector (ball) y is made up of j^.
Now you can again imagine how x is made up of 10 different balls, travelling in the same direction. The unit vector is i^. i^ + i^ = i^ so sum of 10i^ = 10i = x

Similarly, the sum of 10 j^ = y

What happens when the two balls collide? The ball in y-direction stands still, while the ball in x-direction starts travelling in both x and y-direction!

To put it on paper,

10i + 10j = 10i + 10j

What if x = 5i + 7j and y = 5i + 3j?

x + y = 5i+ 7j + 5i + 3j = 10i + 10j

The whole thing is a parallelogram.

